Hey, it's Michael Barbaro from the
Daily. I'm here with a new way that you
can listen to podcasts. And maybe you're
thinking, I don't need that. After all,
you are clearly hearing me right now.
But I'm telling you, you kind of do need
this. You want this in your life. It is
so convenient. So, right now on the New
York Times app, down at the bottom,
you'll see a set of headphones and the
word listen. Once you tap on it, you can
find our show and so many other great
shows. Ezra Klein, headlines, Hardfork,
The Interview. On top of all those
podcasts, you can get narrated articles,
audio versions of news stories, so you
can turn on that big, incredible New
York Times magazine story while you run
or cook or drive home. It is truly
great, and it makes it so easy to find
something to listen to anywhere and
everywhere. If you don't have the New
York Times app, no problem. But as they
say, run Do Not Walk to the App Store on
your phone, get the New York Times app,
and then tap listen at the bottom of the
screen. Okay, now back to today's
episode.
From the New York Times, I'm Natalie
Kitroof. This is the Daily.
[Music]
Last week, President Trump hit several
countries with yet another round of
punishing tariffs.
So far, the economy's been resilient in
the face of his trade war, but it's
unclear how long that'll last.
Today, I talked to my colleague,
Dealbook editor Andrew Ross Sorcin,
about what CEOs are telling him
privately about Trump's tariffs and
where they think all of this is headed.
It's Monday, August 11th.
[Music]
>> Andrew, welcome to the show.
>> Thanks for having me.
>> We are coming to you because you are one
of the most deeply sourced and best
connected business reporters out there.
You literally talked to the president on
CNBC last week.
>> I did. It was kind of wild.
>> Kind of amazing. and you're regularly
talking to business executives who've
been navigating these ups and downs of
tariffs for months. I feel like by this
point we've asked this question on the
show over and over again, but help me
make sense of this moment. What is the
status of Trump's tariffs as of right
now?
So the big shift is that after many many
months of speculation about tariffs,
about what the ultimate rates would look
like, about how severe they would be and
how businesses would have to navigate
them, that the tariffs are actually
here.
So we had what the president called
Liberation Day back in April,
>> right?
>> He announced these remarkably high
tariffs. I mean, we're talking about
numbers in excess of 100%, in some cases
145%.
And business leaders, politicians around
the world had a collective freakout.
>> Yep.
>> But over the last several months, those
tariff rates continually got delayed and
postponed.
>> Right. We got that taco meme on Wall
Street. The taco meme. Trump always
chickens out.
>> Trump always chickens out. And so here
we are in the month of August and we now
have in large part a framework for what
the tariff rates are going to be.
>> President Trump's sweeping global
tariffs for more than 90 countries have
come into effect,
>> including Japan, the UK, and the
European Union.
>> And the president to some degree at
least isn't totally chickenening out.
>> This is probably the biggest deal ever
reached in any capacity, trade or beyond
trade. And now if you are a US company
that is importing goods into the United
States, you are writing a check to Uncle
Sam.
>> We have hundreds of billions of dollars
pouring into our country now. We should
have done this many years ago.
[Music]
>> So what are some of the rates that we're
now looking at actually amount to?
>> So if goods are coming in from the EU,
you're paying 15%. If goods are coming
in from Japan, you're paying 15%. If
goods are coming in from China, right
this moment, you're paying actually only
30% with the prospect that you could be
paying 125% because that piece of the
puzzle has not been fit into the puzzle
just yet. Still unsettled.
>> Still unsettled. By the way, India
unsettled 50%.
>> Right. What was that, Andrew? That
shocking rate on India that was just
announced of 50% really took me by
surprise. I think it took a lot of
people by surprise.
>> Well, it's a huge about face for the US
government and our country's
relationship with India. For the last
several years, we have been trying to
actually push a lot of companies to
actually get out of places like China
and move their manufacturing to places
like India. But India has been one of
the biggest importer of oil from Russia
and so they have been effectively
propping up the Russian economy and
Trump is now saying that he's going to
use the tariff chess piece if you will
to change that dynamic.
>> Okay. So we have these huge tariffs on
India. We have different rates all over
the world. A sense that these things are
really in effect. How are all of the
CEOs, all the executives, the investors,
the policy makers that you talk to
reacting?
>> Honestly, the surprising thing is at
this point they're actually a lot calmer
about it all than you might imagine.
They may not like it,
>> but I think they're recognizing and
deciding that this is their new normal.
And the other thing that's so surprising
is just how sanguin the markets and the
investor class has been around this
because you know back in April there
really was a freakout not just among the
CEOs but the stock market fell
precipitously until the president
delayed and postponed these tariffs.
>> Yep. I remember that.
>> You know now in recent days you've had
the market either flat or actually go up
which suggests that the market is
settling in. And to some degree they're
saying this is okay.
>> Okay. Just explain that to me.
>> There's a state of permanence now about
these tariffs. One way or the other, for
at least the next several years, if not
the next decades, and I say decades
plural, I think there's a recognition
that we are going to be living with some
form of tariff. And by the way, maybe
those tariffs will change and go up and
down, but there's now a sense that it's
here. There's a a window into what that
actually looks like. somewhere between
10% on the lowest end and maybe 30% on
the highest end. And so they're starting
to realize we're just going to have to
plan to live with this
>> right
>> now. I don't want to overstate the sense
that everybody's cool with this right
inside the boardrooms and the corner
offices of corporate America. They're
worried. They're just saying, "Okay,
we're gonna have to figure out how to
deal with our worry." And that's
different than the last couple of months
of, "Okay, we're worried, we're freaked
out, and we think that somehow if we can
just get to the president, we're going
to somehow get him to back off all of
this." And now that they've realized
that that's not the case, they're like,
"Okay,
we have to actually just figure out what
to do about it."
>> Can we get into that? Actually, up until
now, how have CEOs navigated these
tariffs? I mean, I can imagine it's been
a really rough road.
>> I think there's two things that have
been going on. One is they've been
making pilgrimages to Washington to see
lawmakers, to try to see the president,
to try to see all of his deputies and
lieutenants around him and desperately
try to persuade them away from this
clearly unsuccessfully.
>> Clearly,
>> the other thing they've been doing is
spending an extraordinary amount of time
trying to rethink their supply chain.
Can they move goods from one place to
the other? In certain cases, they were
trying to get as much of their supplies
into the United States early to try to
get ahead of the tariffs. So, you had
Ford, for example, literally sending
trucks back and forth between the border
of Mexico and the US, bringing as many
supplies to the US as they could because
they knew they're going to slap us with
these tariffs.
>> Okay, so they're desperately trying to
get the Trump team to back off. That
doesn't work. They've been trying to
stockpile to avoid the hit of tariffs,
>> right?
>> In the meantime, they haven't been
raising prices. That's been a big
mystery. What's going on there? Why
haven't they passed on the cost of these
tariffs to consumers?
>> So, first of all, just Mayalpa myself,
which is I think I like a lot of people
thought in April that we were going to
see higher prices and higher prices
super quickly.
>> I love that you're admitting this. Well,
look, when you saw the president out
with in some cases tariffs that were
supposed to be implemented overnight at
145%. You would invariably say if in
fact that's true, prices should go up.
So, the first piece that I was just
wrong about was actually that these
things would get delayed and postponed.
The other thing though when you talk to
CEOs of some of the big retail companies
and just any major manufacturer here in
the US is they say that they've been
trying to eat as much of the tariff cost
so far as they can.
>> And why is that?
>> It's interesting because if you go back
to the pandemic, companies did something
called taking up price very quickly.
They were very worried about inflation
and they would almost raise prices even
before they got hit with the costs
themselves.
>> Right.
>> And so I thought and I think a lot of
people thought, okay, even before the
tariffs are here, companies are just
going to raise the prices because they
want to get ahead of them.
>> They're going to repeat their pandemic
playbook.
>> Exactly. Two things have come into play
that are different. One is that the
economy is not as strong as it was
during the pandemic. And so there was a
real concern that actually the market
can't really accept a much higher price
at the kind of volume that some of these
companies are selling their products at.
That if you were the first mover to
raise prices, you would actually lose
market share.
>> Basically, if you're the first one to
raise your prices, if you're a Walmart,
your customers might turn to a Target.
>> Exactly. And the other thing, and this
is more anecdotal,
is a sense among business leaders that
given the president's propensity to
critique them directly, if not more than
that, that just the optics of raising
prices could cause the president to come
out publicly and single them out. You
saw this happen earlier this year
already when there was a news report
that Amazon was considering putting
literally on the website the cost of the
tariffs.
>> Right
>> the day that happened, the president was
out there an hour or two later after
that report, which was erroneous by the
way, but he was out there criticizing
Amazon and Jeff Bezos was on the phone
with the president.
>> Okay? And this may seem obvious, but
just slow down here for me a little bit.
Explain what the CEOs are so afraid of.
I mean, what is it that they actually
think will happen once the president
gets so angry with them?
>> Look, I think this president has taken
to targeting certain industries, certain
companies that he doesn't like for
whatever reason. uh we saw his approach
to universities in America. We saw him
go after some of the big law firms in
America. We saw him go after Paramount
and CBS News, for example, and not allow
a merger to take place until a
settlement was reached. So, I think that
there's enough examples that the
business community looks at and goes,
it's not just that he's going to write
something on Truth Social. if he wants
to send his regulatory apparatus after
us in one way or another, he can and he
will.
And that's, I think, to some degree just
a deterrent for the entire business
world when it comes to doing anything
that they think would cause his wrath.
>> So, based on those private conversations
that you're having, if you can share
some of the learnings that you've had,
>> how does that fear operate within a
company? How does it change your
decisionm?
>> I give you a very tangible example. I
talked to an executive at a company that
was thinking of hiring somebody that had
worked in the Biden administration.
Not a particularly famous person in the
Biden administration, but somebody who
had worked in that Biden administration.
As part of thinking about whether to
hire that person or not, they decided to
make phone calls to back channel with
people in and around the president to
try to understand whether this person
would be quote unquote acceptable to the
president.
>> Wow. Running individual hiring decisions
by them.
>> I think that is the fear that he has
imposed on parts of the business
community. And so you can look at that
example. That's a small example. Think
about a company that's going to very
publicly raise their prices. Well, if
they can try to avoid raising their
prices for as long as they can, they
will.
>> You know, it's interesting because I
spent a lot of time talking to these
leaders of companies, many of whom
happen to be billionaires, and you'd
think, okay, they have this
extraordinary amount of money, they
shouldn't be worried about the president
or anybody else. I mean, I think that's
sort of the conventional wisdom.
>> Yeah, that that's exactly why I asked
the question. But the truth is that I
think almost singularly
this is the one person in the world who
has more power than they do. But you
know in fairness cos have always been
trying to stay in the good graces of
frankly every president. And I was just
with a a tech CEO who actually made this
point. He's a Trump supporter who said,
"Look, during the Biden administration,
you know, we were implementing all sorts
of DEI and ESG related programs in our
companies to hopefully buy some goodwill
with the president. We were investing in
EVs. Sometimes the Biden administration
during COVID was requesting certain
social media companies to take down
certain posts to amplify other things
and that some of the big tech companies
were doing that in part to stay in the
good graces of the administration that
was ultimately regulating them in all
sorts of other ways. Now, I'm not saying
that those are all equivalent things.
>> Sure.
>> But I think it's just worth putting on
the table. I get that what companies
have been doing to adapt to tariffs is a
way of kind of avoiding a conflict with
the president, but in this case, these
companies, I mean, they have
shareholders. They have to put out
earnings reports, you know, and eating
the cost of these tariffs just doesn't
seem like a sustainable long-term
solution.
>> It isn't.
And I think the more that I talk to some
of these executives, especially in the
last couple of weeks, there's a greater
sense that things are about to change.
We'll be right back.
Okay, Andrew, you said this strategy is
going to have to change. What are you
hearing about what CEOs are going to do?
>> You know, I just got back from Aspen,
Colorado. The Aspen Institute has
something called the Aspen Economic
Strategy Group meeting every year with
many of the former Treasury Secretaries
in the United States, Hank Pollson,
Larry Summers, and Janet Yellen, and so
many CEOs, Larry Frink, who runs Black
Rockck, and Brian Moahan who runs Bank
of America. And one of the things just
coming out of that meeting that you
realize is that this is unsustainable,
that at some point the dam does have to
break when it comes to prices. And so I
think you're going to start to see
prices rise. And there have been very
public indicators of that already.
Amazon's said that they're going to have
to raise prices. And they're going to
have to raise prices for two reasons.
One is that their own suppliers are
charging them more. And also all of the
sellers in their marketplace are going
to be raising their prices because they
too can't afford it.
>> This is an interesting example because
Amazon was this company that was shamed
by Trump, you know, didn't do this,
backed away, and now they're saying,
"Look, we're going to have to raise
these prices."
>> The rubber meets the road. And while
we're talking about the rubber meeting,
another good example of this is Ford.
And I've spent time talking to Jim
Farley, who's the CEO of Ford. This is a
company that he now says is going to
lose $2 billion this year.
>> Whoa.
>> And so what I keep hearing over and over
again from CEOs is that come this fall,
they are going to be forced to raise
their prices despite how much they like
to keep them where they are if they
could.
>> And what are they telling you about
their hiring plans? Cuz we just got this
pretty weak jobs report. Are your
conversations with these executives
reflecting any softening in the labor
market?
>> Well, you know, one of the things that a
number of CEOs have told me just in the
past couple of weeks is this idea that
when they've had job openings that in
many cases they're not filling them. And
one of the reasons they're not filling
them, and maybe that's reflective of
what those job numbers suggest, is this
uncertainty. The uncertainty of the
tariffs have created an environment
where they don't know what the future
portends. They don't know once these
tariffs are in effect and what prices
they're going to ultimately have to sell
their products at what the business
looks like in the same way that it did
over the last 6 months. But, you know, a
lot of the data that we're getting still
is inconclusive.
If you look at, for example, Bank of
America and their spending reports, they
actually track every customer and how
they use credit cards, they would say
spending is up. You talk to the CEO of
Uber who I spoke to last week, he would
tell you there are more people that are
ordering cars than before, that they're
seeing no slowdown.
>> And so there is this sort of mixed
picture and I don't think we have real
clarity just yet.
>> Okay. So, we've talked about various
ways that the companies might adapt to
tariffs, these new potential strategies.
One, raising prices. Another potential
effect would be their hiring.
What if they just did what the Trump
administration wants them to do and
moved manufacturing or sourcing to the
United States? I mean, that is a way of
adapting to the tariffs.
>> And many are looking at that. There is
no question that they're trying in some
cases to do that.
But it takes a very long time to be able
to move supply chains around, be able to
build a new manufacturing facility. And
so during that period of time, you still
are going to have to import goods.
>> You know, an example of that is the way
Apple is approaching all of this. We
just saw them announce that they are
going to be investing an additional $100
billion in manufacturing here in
America.
>> Huge announcement. But Tim Cook was
asked in the White House, when would the
actual iPhone, the full phone, be
produced in the United States? And he
said not for a very long time.
>> And that's because even if he wanted to,
just the physical nature of getting
everything coordinated would take years.
>> So basically, even if the tariffs have
the desired outcome,
you could still see an economic impact
in the meantime. While that is playing
out,
>> the laws of economic gravity would
suggest that at some point you have to
pass the costs on to customers. The
question is how big an impact that's
going to have on the overall economy.
>> Given this picture that you've laid out
for us with these cracks emerging in the
US economy, why has the stock market
been doing so well? We're in all-time
high territory right now. How do you
explain that? Well, there's this other
phenomenon in our economy that we
haven't talked about, which is
artificial intelligence and just all of
the data centers which are being built
around the country which are helping
support our entire economy in ways that
didn't exist only a couple years ago.
And so you have companies like Microsoft
which will spend $120 billion this year.
That's into the economy to be building
data centers. And when they're building
data centers, it has an impact on buying
semiconductors. So all of a sudden
they're buying these GPUs from Nvidia.
They are building on land. So they're
helping support real estate prices. All
of these data centers need electricians
and construction work and electricity.
So the energy complex is getting
impacted. So there is this enormous
force that is lifting a lot of parts of
our economy. So even if prices go up in
certain areas, it is possible that
perhaps our economy can absorb more of
it than we might if we didn't have this
thing called AI happening around us.
>> You're saying these companies are just
injecting a huge amount of cash into the
economy right now. And and that's part
of what's making it look so resilient.
>> It's extraordinary. I mean, some people
would call it a gold rush. Other people
would call it a sugar rush. And I don't
think we know yet which it ultimately
will be. It's hard to believe that these
kinds of investments at this scale are
going to be here forever. Call me in 5
years from now. It's possible that if it
took several hundred people to build the
data center, the data center only needs
5, 10, 15 employees. So invariably, you
know, this can't go on at that level
forever. But there are some people who
believe that AI will fundamentally
change our economy in all sorts of other
ways.
>> So big picture, I want to zoom out and
just think broadly about the moment that
we're in. When we say that tariffs are
here to stay, when the CEOs, when the
investors tell you that, how significant
is that, Andrew, in the course of
economic history,
>> we have not seen anything like this in
nearly a hundred years. The last time
that we had this kind of reordering was
in the 30s and 40s. And part of that was
Smoot Holly, which was an effort by the
United States to tariff other countries.
And then we had a war
which reshapes a lot of our universe.
I think these tariffs are going to
reshape the relationship that the United
States has with so many countries
and for a very long time because one of
the things that many of the policy
leaders that I talk to say is these
tariffs are going to be here likely long
after President Trump is in the White
House. And the reason for that is if in
fact they're bringing in something like
300400 billion a year in revenue from a
budget perspective, it's going to be
very hard for Congress to say, "Well,
we're not going to have that money
anymore,
>> right? Congress is going to want to
spend that money.
>> Congress is going to want to spend that
money." You're going to have companies
that have completely reoriented the way
they have organized their own supply
chains. They're not going to turn around
on a dime and change that after making
all of these new investments. And then
you're going to have all of these
trading partners which have reorganized
the incentives even inside their own
countries as a function of this. And so
it's going to be very very hard to undo.
>> So people in Trump's orbit, maybe even
the president himself at times have cast
what we're looking at is an effort to
really reorder the global economy. I
guess my question is after hearing you,
has that already happened?
>> It's a great question. It may have
already happened and we didn't even
realize it.
You know, this story feels like it keeps
changing every day and it's hard to know
what really is going to come next, what
the stock market's going to do, what the
bond market's going to do, what the
political class will do over the next
several years. But in so many ways it
does feel already that the world has
changed and in some way perhaps
permanently.
>> Andrew, thanks so much for your time.
>> Thanks for having me.
[Music]
>> We'll be right back.
Here's
what else you need to know today.
>> Vladimir Putin said that he would never
sit down with Zalinsky, the head of
Ukraine. And the president has now got
that to change words.
>> On Sunday, Vice President JD Vance said
that the US is working to arrange a
meeting between Russian President
Vladimir Putin and Ukrainian President
Vladimir Zalinski to discuss an end to
the war. Yeah, the president said this
to me today privately said, "Look, uh,
maybe this works out, maybe it doesn't,
but it's worth the effort. It's worth
trying, and we're going to keep
>> Vance made the comments during an
interview on Fox News. He said he didn't
think it would be a good idea for the
Russian and Ukrainian leaders to meet
before President Trump meets with Putin
later this week. That meeting is
supposed to take place on Friday in
Alaska.
It would be the first in-person summit
between Putin and an American president
since Russia invaded Ukraine in 2022,
and it's seen as a victory for Putin,
who's been isolated from Western leaders
for months.
And in a highly unusual arrangement, two
American AI chip makers have agreed to
give the US government a cut of the
money they make in China. People
familiar with the deal told the Times
that the companies Nvidia and Advanced
Micro Devices are expected to pay the US
15% of the money they take in from
selling AI chips to China.
The Times is reporting that Nvidia CEO
met with Trump at the White House to
discuss the deal last Wednesday and
agreed to the arrangement. The Commerce
Department began granting licenses for
AI chip sales 2 days later.
that essentially made the federal
government a partner in the company's
business in China.
[Music]
Today's episode was produced by Ricky
Nevetski, Alex Stern, and Caitlyn
O'Keefe. It was edited by MJ Davis Lynn,
and Mark George with help from Lisa
Chow. contains original music by Alicia
Eup, Dan Pal and Marian Lozano and was
engineered by Alyssa Moxley. Our theme
music is by Jim Brunberg and Ben
Lansberg of Wonderly.
[Music]
That's it for the Daily. I'm Natalie
Ketro. See you tomorrow.
[Music]